I met him at the in his office in
Robinson gymnasium in the University of
Kansas in 1933 when I in my first
attempt to enroll at the University of
Kansas my grandfather had a reputation
for being colorblind he didn't seek
cover and in the 30s
almost everybody selling well I think
Naismith's progressive attitudes is
where the race were probably a
combination of his profound faith and
and probably his Canadian upbringing
obviously Canada didn't have the baggage
of race relations that the u.s. did and
he didn't think twice about expressing
his his views the way he intervened to
reach out to John McClendon who
essentially wound up on his doorstep his
father brought him to Kansas University
during the height of the racial element
in this country knowing full well that
he would not be able to play basketball
at Kansas but his father had a better
idea of where he wanted his son to go in
his life John McClendon was a young man
from Kansas City who from the first time
you saw a basketball game you want to be
a basketball coach his father said I'll
get a second job and put you through
college so you could be a basketball
coach but with the understanding you
have to go to the University of Kansas
because dr. Naismith invented the game
of basketball he wrote the rules his
professor there so you can learn from
the man that wrote the rules the game
the intuition of McClellan's own father
was that this is a man James Naismith
you should look up because he'll give
you a fair shake
that's a father's instinct how did he
know that there was no advertisement
about it but from a distance he could
see that dr. Naismith was a man of
conviction he was a good man he was a
man that respected people and therefore
he dropped off his son and just left him
there because dr. Naismith
that point had not met the father Thomas
is amazing walk-in on his office and
Angela and he was sitting they arrived
is this and I walked in and he asked me
what do you do for me 19:33 my
grandfather is 72 years old he's sitting
in his chair first day of classes he
looks up there's a young black kid 18
years old standing in the door he said
you're supposed to look after me and dr.
Naismith trying to chuckle he said well
who are you he said I'm John McClendon
from Kansas City and my daddy said to
look you up because he said that you
don't see color that you would treat me
right and take me under your wing
and he said do I know you're dead and
John said no he said but my dad said
you're colorblind
sure enough Naismith became an angel and
John McClendon shoulder coach McClendon
did talk about dr. Naismith being
someone who did not have a color
perspective of people he saw people for
who they are and what they were about
Kansas is right there on the frontier of
racial problems and John McClendon
wasn't the only black student on campus
but he certainly was in a in a minority
and you know he ran into problems on
campus trying to use the swimming pool
part of my granddad's rules worry my
granddad comes from strange rules if you
were getting a degree of any kind in the
athletic department which he was ahead
of you had to be able to swim well John
was a good swimmer with my granddad
didn't know he was a lifeguard at the
Blackpool in Kansas City so John would
swim into the next day and when he got
out of the pool he went to the showers
he came back got dressed the maintenance
guys green in the swimmin pool that's a
big chore and John said are you draining
the swimming pool because it's Wednesday
you drained the swimming pool class
women and their latest man said use your
own judgment McClendon was put in a
situation where he would have to come
back again and again and he would tell
them he said you can drain it but I'm
gonna be back every time to swim in it
went back to my grandfather my
grandfather Zeus was very simple as
always next day John went swimming my
grandfather put the two biggest football
players on both sides to the pool and
there weren't any questions asked there
was no pool drain was then there was
science written all over the University
of Kansas don't swim with the N word
John took the signs down took my
grandfather my grandfather went to the
chants of the school and the president
said if I ever see another one of these
signs I'm gonna resign and go to
different university here's the man that
had invented basketball we'd been to
school at that point for over 40 years
who said I'm gonna leave go to another
school so there's no more signs was her
brother anything that personal nature
like that me included
I had somebody in my corner
his first coaching job dr. Naismith was
able to get that coaching job for coach
John McClendon so he was there for him
for all the right reasons
and the entire nation and got you to
accept me as a head coach so I wasn't
coaching basketball money can't enjoy a
conference championship Naismith came to
see a couple of the games and told me
that I had a good grasp of the game and
actually concentrated on basketball is a
sport that I follow a lot of people
don't know this coach McClendon was the
first black coach and professional
basketball he coached the Cleveland
Piper's in the O ABL
John McClendon went on to be one of the
disciples of Naismith of course
McClendon goes on to become a legendary
basketball coach a member of the very
Hall of Fame that bears the Naismith
family name I chose the University of
Kansas because of dr. Naismith was there